Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the cerebral circulation and its regulation.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the cerebral blood flow and the brain's metabolic requirements.
The brain has a high and continuous requirement for oxygen and glucose and almost
no reserve, so it depends on a large, constant cerebral blood flow,
the maintenance of which is critical and is the basis of much of neuro-anaesthesia.
The brain receives a large blood flow — around fifteen per cent of the cardiac
output, or some seven hundred and fifty millilitres a minute,
about fifty millilitres per hundred grams of brain per minute on average — although
it is only two per cent of the body weight.
The flow is not uniform: the grey matter, with its high metabolic activity,
receives several times the flow of the white matter.
The brain's metabolic rate for oxygen is high,
around three and a half millilitres per hundred grams per minute,
consuming about twenty per cent of the body's oxygen;
and it depends almost entirely on the aerobic metabolism of glucose,
with negligible stores of either oxygen or glucose.
Consequently, an interruption of the cerebral blood flow causes loss of
consciousness within seconds and irreversible injury within minutes.
So the brain receives a large, continuous cerebral blood flow — about fifty
millilitres per hundred grams per minute,
fifteen per cent of the cardiac output — greater to the active grey matter;
with a high oxygen consumption and an almost complete dependence on the aerobic
metabolism of glucose and no reserve,
so that interruption of flow rapidly causes unconsciousness and injury — the basis
of the brain's vulnerability and of its protection.
Define the cerebral perfusion pressure and describe the determinants of cerebral
blood flow.
The cerebral blood flow is determined, like flow in any vascular bed,
by the perfusion pressure across it and the resistance of its vessels,
but with the special feature that the brain is enclosed in the rigid skull,
so the intracranial pressure becomes important — a relationship central to
neuro-anaesthesia.
The cerebral perfusion pressure is the pressure driving blood through the brain,
and is defined as the difference between the mean arterial pressure and the
intracranial pressure — or the venous pressure if higher;
because the brain is enclosed in the skull, the intracranial pressure,
rather than the venous pressure, usually opposes the arterial pressure.
The cerebral blood flow is then the cerebral perfusion pressure divided by the
cerebrovascular resistance.
So three quantities determine the flow: the mean arterial pressure,
the intracranial pressure, and the cerebrovascular resistance,
which is actively varied by the cerebral vessels.
A normal cerebral perfusion pressure is around seventy to eighty millimetres of
mercury; it falls if the arterial pressure falls or the intracranial pressure rises.
So the cerebral perfusion pressure is the mean arterial pressure minus the
intracranial pressure, and the cerebral blood flow is this perfusion pressure
divided by the cerebrovascular resistance;
so the flow depends on the arterial pressure,
the intracranial pressure and the vascular resistance — a relationship,
special to the enclosed brain, that underlies the management of cerebral perfusion.
Describe the autoregulation of the cerebral blood flow.
The cerebral blood flow is held remarkably constant over a wide range of perfusion
pressures by autoregulation, which protects the brain from the consequences of
changes in blood pressure, and whose curve and limits are important in anaesthesia.
If the cerebral blood flow is plotted against the cerebral perfusion pressure,
or the mean arterial pressure, it is seen to remain nearly constant — a plateau —
over a wide range, conventionally from a mean arterial pressure of about sixty to a
hundred and sixty millimetres of mercury;
below the lower limit the flow falls with pressure, risking ischaemia,
and above the upper limit it rises with pressure, risking oedema and haemorrhage.
The mechanism is chiefly myogenic: the cerebral arterioles constrict when the
pressure rises and dilate when it falls,
adjusting the resistance to keep the flow constant.
Autoregulation takes a little time to respond and can be overwhelmed by rapid
changes.
It is shifted to the right in chronic hypertension,
so that the hypertensive patient needs a higher pressure to maintain flow;
and it is impaired or abolished by injury, ischaemia, and some anaesthetic agents,
leaving the flow pressure-dependent.
So cerebral blood flow is autoregulated,
held constant over a mean arterial pressure of about sixty to a hundred and sixty
millimetres of mercury by the myogenic adjustment of arteriolar tone;
below the lower limit ischaemia threatens and above the upper,
oedema and haemorrhage; the curve shifted right in chronic hypertension and
impaired by injury and anaesthetic agents — an autoregulation central to protecting
the brain and to its management.
Describe the effect of carbon dioxide and oxygen on the cerebral blood flow.
The cerebral blood flow is powerfully influenced by the arterial carbon dioxide,
and, at low levels, by the arterial oxygen,
and these chemical reactivities are of the greatest practical importance in
anaesthesia, since the carbon dioxide can be manipulated to alter the cerebral
blood flow and volume.
The carbon dioxide reactivity is striking:
the cerebral blood flow varies almost linearly with the arterial carbon dioxide
over the physiological range, rising with hypercapnia and falling with hypocapnia —
the flow changing by around two to four per cent for each millimetre of mercury,
or proportionately more per kilopascal, change in carbon dioxide.
This is mediated by changes in the pH around the cerebral vessels,
carbon dioxide dilating them.
So hyperventilation, lowering the carbon dioxide,
constricts the cerebral vessels and reduces the cerebral blood flow and blood
volume — used to reduce a raised intracranial pressure acutely — while hypercapnia
increases them.
The oxygen reactivity is different:
the cerebral blood flow is little affected by the arterial oxygen over the normal
range, but when the oxygen falls below around fifty millimetres of mercury,
the flow rises steeply, defending the oxygen delivery.
So the cerebral blood flow varies almost linearly with the arterial carbon dioxide
— rising with hypercapnia, falling with hypocapnia,
mediated by perivascular pH — so hyperventilation reduces cerebral blood flow and
volume; while it is little affected by oxygen until the arterial level falls below
about fifty millimetres of mercury,
when it rises steeply — reactivities of great importance in the control of the
cerebral circulation in anaesthesia.
Describe the coupling of cerebral blood flow to cerebral metabolism.
The cerebral blood flow is normally closely matched to the local metabolic activity
of the brain, both regionally and overall — flow-metabolism coupling — so that
active regions receive more flow, an arrangement efficient for the brain and
relevant to the effects of anaesthesia and to functional imaging.
The principle is that the local cerebral blood flow is matched to the local
cerebral metabolic rate: where neuronal activity increases,
the local blood flow increases to match the increased demand for oxygen and glucose
and to remove the products; and where activity falls, flow falls.
This coupling operates over the whole brain too:
conditions that increase the global metabolic rate, such as seizures or fever,
increase the global cerebral blood flow, while those that reduce it,
such as hypothermia and anaesthesia, reduce the flow.
The coupling is mediated by local signals released by active neurons and glia —
including changes in carbon dioxide, hydrogen ions, potassium,
adenosine and nitric oxide — which adjust the local vascular tone.
This is the basis of functional brain imaging,
which detects active regions by their increased flow.
So the cerebral blood flow is coupled to the cerebral metabolic rate,
regionally and globally, active regions and states receiving more flow and
depressed states less, mediated by local metabolic signals adjusting vascular tone;
an efficient matching of supply to demand,
the basis of functional imaging and important to the parallel effects of
anaesthesia on metabolism and flow.
Describe the effects of the anaesthetic agents on cerebral blood flow and
metabolism.
The anaesthetic agents have important and characteristic effects on the cerebral
blood flow and the cerebral metabolic rate,
and these effects are central to neuro-anaesthesia,
since they determine the agent's suitability for the patient with intracranial
disease.
The intravenous agents — propofol, the barbiturates,
and others except ketamine — reduce the cerebral metabolic rate, and,
through flow-metabolism coupling, reduce the cerebral blood flow and blood volume
in parallel; they tend to preserve autoregulation and carbon-dioxide reactivity,
and so are generally favourable in the patient with raised intracranial pressure,
reducing the cerebral blood volume.
Ketamine is an exception, tending to increase the cerebral metabolic rate and blood
flow.
The volatile inhalational agents have a dual effect:
they reduce the cerebral metabolic rate, which would reduce flow,
but they also have a direct vasodilator action on the cerebral vessels,
which tends to increase the flow and blood volume — this direct vasodilatation
predominating at higher concentrations,
uncoupling flow from metabolism and tending to raise the cerebral blood volume and
intracranial pressure, and impairing autoregulation;
so they are used cautiously in intracranial disease.
So the intravenous agents, except ketamine, reduce cerebral metabolism and,
by coupling, cerebral blood flow and volume, favourably; ketamine increases them;
and the volatile agents, while reducing metabolism,
directly vasodilate the cerebral vessels,
tending at higher doses to increase the cerebral blood volume and intracranial
pressure and impair autoregulation — effects determining the choice of agent in
neuro-anaesthesia.
How is the cerebral blood flow measured?
The cerebral blood flow can be measured by several methods,
based on the principles of indicator dilution, of imaging,
or of the velocity of flow, and an outline is useful,
though in clinical anaesthesia surrogate monitors are more often used than direct
measurement.
The classical methods are based on the Fick principle applied to an inert tracer:
the Kety-Schmidt method used the uptake of an inert gas, nitrous oxide,
by the brain to calculate the global flow.
The injection or inhalation of a radioactive tracer, such as xenon,
with detection over the scalp, allows the measurement of regional flow.
Modern imaging methods — positron emission tomography,
and magnetic resonance and computed-tomography perfusion techniques — measure
regional cerebral blood flow and are used in research and diagnosis.
At the bedside, transcranial Doppler ultrasound measures the velocity of blood flow
in the large cerebral arteries, giving a continuous,
non-invasive indication of changes in flow.
Surrogate monitors of the adequacy of flow and oxygenation,
rather than flow itself, are often used in practice — the jugular venous oxygen
saturation, and near-infrared cerebral oximetry.
So the cerebral blood flow is measured by inert-tracer methods such as the
Kety-Schmidt technique, by radioactive-tracer and modern imaging methods giving
regional flow, and, at the bedside,
by transcranial Doppler measuring flow velocity;
with surrogate monitors of oxygenation — jugular venous saturation and cerebral
oximetry — often used in practice — methods based on tracer dilution,
imaging and flow velocity.
Pull it together: how is the cerebral blood flow regulated to protect the brain?
I would draw it together around the cerebral blood flow as a flow that must be kept
adequate and constant to protect a vulnerable, metabolically demanding brain,
and that is regulated by several overlapping mechanisms to that end.
The brain's high, continuous demand and lack of reserve make a constant,
adequate flow essential. This is achieved by regulating the flow against the two
threats of too little and too much.
Autoregulation keeps the flow constant against changes in the perfusion pressure,
over a mean arterial pressure of about sixty to a hundred and sixty millimetres of
mercury, by adjusting the arteriolar tone — protecting against ischaemia when
pressure falls and against oedema and haemorrhage when it rises.
Flow-metabolism coupling matches the flow to the local and global metabolic
activity, so that supply meets demand. The carbon-dioxide reactivity adjusts the
flow with the carbon dioxide, and the oxygen reactivity defends the flow when
oxygen falls.
These mechanisms can be impaired by disease and anaesthesia,
leaving the flow pressure-dependent and the brain vulnerable.
So the cerebral blood flow is regulated to protect the brain by autoregulation
against changes in perfusion pressure,
by flow-metabolism coupling matching supply to demand,
and by the carbon-dioxide and oxygen reactivities;
mechanisms that keep the flow adequate and constant but that are impaired by
disease and anaesthesia — the regulation whose understanding underlies the
protection of the brain in neuro-anaesthesia.
Describe the arterial supply of the brain and the circle of Willis.
The brain's arterial supply is arranged to deliver its large,
continuous blood flow with a degree of protection against the failure of any single
vessel, and the circle of Willis is central to this,
of anatomical and clinical importance.
The brain is supplied by two pairs of arteries:
the two internal carotid arteries anteriorly,
supplying most of the cerebral hemispheres;
and the two vertebral arteries posteriorly, which join to form the basilar artery,
supplying the brainstem, cerebellum and posterior brain.
These are connected at the base of the brain by the circle of Willis,
an anastomotic ring linking the anterior and posterior, and the left and right,
supplies, through the communicating arteries.
The functional importance of this circle is that it provides collateral
circulation: if one supplying vessel is narrowed or occluded,
blood can flow through the circle from the other vessels to maintain the supply to
the affected region, providing protection.
However, the circle is anatomically complete and functional in only a proportion of
people, so this protection is variable. The major cerebral arteries arise from the
circle to supply their territories.
So the brain is supplied by the two internal carotid arteries anteriorly and the
two vertebral arteries, forming the basilar, posteriorly,
connected at the base by the anastomotic circle of Willis through the communicating
arteries; this circle providing collateral circulation that can protect against the
occlusion of a single vessel, though it is complete in only a proportion of people
— an arterial arrangement of protective and clinical significance.
Describe the cerebral venous drainage and the jugular bulb.
The venous drainage of the brain has features of importance to the intracranial
pressure and to the monitoring of cerebral oxygenation,
so it is worth describing alongside the arterial supply.
The cerebral veins drain into the dural venous sinuses — channels within the dura,
including the sagittal and the transverse sinuses — which collect the venous blood
and the absorbed cerebrospinal fluid and direct them towards the internal jugular
veins, which carry the blood out of the skull to the heart.
Two features are important.
First, because the brain is enclosed in the rigid skull,
and the venous system is a low-pressure, collapsible component,
the cerebral venous volume is part of the compensatory reserve in the Monro-Kellie
relationship, and obstruction to venous drainage — by a raised intrathoracic
pressure, head-down position, or compression of the neck veins — raises the
cerebral blood volume and the intracranial pressure;
so ensuring free venous drainage is important in managing raised intracranial
pressure.
Second, the jugular venous blood, sampled at the jugular bulb,
represents the mixed venous blood draining the brain,
so its oxygen saturation reflects the balance of cerebral oxygen delivery and
consumption, and is used to monitor the adequacy of cerebral oxygenation.
So the cerebral veins drain into the dural venous sinuses and thence to the
internal jugular veins; the venous volume forming part of the intracranial
compensatory reserve, so its obstruction raises the intracranial pressure;
and the jugular bulb blood reflecting cerebral oxygen balance,
used to monitor cerebral oxygenation — a drainage of importance to intracranial
pressure and monitoring.
Describe the cerebral ischaemic thresholds and the ischaemic penumbra.
When the cerebral blood flow falls,
the brain's function and survival fail in stages at particular thresholds of flow,
and the concept of the ischaemic penumbra that arises from this is of great
importance in stroke and brain protection, so it is worth setting out.
As the cerebral blood flow falls below the normal of around fifty millilitres per
hundred grams per minute, nothing happens at first, because of the reserve;
but at particular thresholds, function then survival fail.
At a flow of around twenty millilitres per hundred grams per minute,
the electrical function of the neurons fails — the electroencephalogram slows and
the neurons stop functioning — but the cells remain viable,
their structure maintained; this is the threshold of functional failure.
At a lower flow, around ten millilitres per hundred grams per minute,
the energy-dependent processes that maintain cell integrity fail,
the ion gradients collapse, and the cells begin to die — the threshold of
infarction.
Between these two thresholds lies the ischaemic penumbra:
a region of tissue with a flow low enough to have lost function but high enough to
remain viable for a time — electrically silent but structurally intact,
and potentially salvageable if the flow is restored before it dies.
So as cerebral blood flow falls, neuronal function fails at around twenty
millilitres per hundred grams per minute, while infarction begins at around ten;
the ischaemic penumbra being the tissue between these,
which has lost function but remains viable and salvageable for a time — the target
of timely reperfusion in stroke, a concept central to brain protection.
Describe the effect of temperature on cerebral blood flow and metabolism.
Temperature has a marked effect on the cerebral metabolic rate,
and through it on the cerebral blood flow,
and this relationship is the basis of the use of hypothermia for cerebral
protection, so it is worth describing.
The cerebral metabolic rate, like other metabolic processes,
depends on temperature: it falls as the temperature falls,
by around five to seven per cent for each degree Celsius of cooling.
Because the cerebral blood flow is coupled to the metabolic rate,
the flow falls in parallel as metabolism is reduced by cooling.
The reduction in the cerebral metabolic rate by hypothermia is the basis of its
protective effect: by reducing the brain's demand for oxygen and energy,
hypothermia increases its tolerance of reduced blood flow and of ischaemia,
prolonging the time the brain can survive a given reduction in flow — the rationale
for the use of deep hypothermia to protect the brain during procedures requiring
the circulation to be arrested, and for milder hypothermia in other settings.
Importantly, hypothermia reduces both the metabolism associated with electrical
activity and the basal metabolism that maintains cellular integrity,
the latter being why it protects even when the electrical activity is already
abolished.
Conversely, hyperthermia and fever increase the metabolic rate and flow,
and worsen ischaemic injury.
So cooling reduces the cerebral metabolic rate by around five to seven per cent per
degree, with a parallel fall in flow;
this reduction in demand is the basis of the cerebral protection by hypothermia,
increasing tolerance of ischaemia — reducing both functional and basal metabolism —
while hyperthermia conversely worsens injury — a relationship underlying the
protective use of hypothermia.
Describe the monitoring of cerebral oxygenation.
Since the adequacy of the cerebral blood flow and oxygen delivery is what matters
for the brain, and flow itself is hard to measure clinically,
several monitors of cerebral oxygenation are used to detect inadequate delivery,
and an outline of them is useful.
The monitors assess whether the oxygen delivery is meeting the brain's demand.
Jugular venous oximetry measures the oxygen saturation of the blood draining the
brain, sampled at the jugular bulb:
since this is the mixed venous blood of the brain,
a low saturation indicates that the brain is extracting more oxygen than usual
because delivery is inadequate relative to demand,
while a high saturation may indicate luxury perfusion or reduced metabolism.
Near-infrared spectroscopy, or cerebral oximetry,
uses light passed through the skull to measure the oxygenation of the blood in the
underlying brain non-invasively and continuously,
reflecting chiefly the venous-weighted regional oxygenation.
Other approaches include the measurement of brain tissue oxygen tension with an
implanted probe, and the use of the electroencephalogram and evoked potentials,
which fail when flow is inadequate.
So cerebral oxygenation is monitored by jugular venous oximetry — the saturation of
the brain's draining blood, low when delivery is inadequate;
by near-infrared cerebral oximetry, measuring regional oxygenation non-invasively;
and by brain tissue oxygen probes and the electrophysiological monitors;
methods detecting inadequate cerebral oxygen delivery,
used in neuro-anaesthesia and critical care.
Describe the effect of blood viscosity and haematocrit on cerebral blood flow.
The cerebral blood flow is influenced by the viscosity of the blood,
which depends chiefly on the haematocrit,
and this introduces a consideration in the optimisation of cerebral oxygen
delivery, balancing flow against oxygen-carrying capacity.
By the relationships governing flow,
the flow through a vessel varies inversely with the viscosity of the fluid;
and the viscosity of blood depends mainly on the haematocrit — the proportion of
red cells.
So a high haematocrit increases the viscosity and tends to reduce the cerebral
blood flow, while a low haematocrit, as in anaemia or haemodilution,
reduces the viscosity and increases the flow.
This creates a balance in terms of oxygen delivery to the brain,
which is the product of the blood flow and the oxygen content.
The oxygen content depends on the haemoglobin,
so a high haematocrit increases the content but reduces the flow,
while a low haematocrit increases the flow but reduces the content.
There is therefore an optimal haematocrit that maximises cerebral oxygen delivery,
generally thought to be moderately below normal;
this is part of the rationale for haemodilution in some settings,
though it must be balanced against the reduced oxygen-carrying capacity.
So cerebral blood flow varies inversely with blood viscosity,
which depends chiefly on the haematocrit,
so a high haematocrit reduces flow and a low one increases it;
since oxygen delivery is the product of flow and content, there is an optimal,
moderately reduced haematocrit maximising cerebral oxygen delivery — a balance
relevant to haemodilution and the management of the haematocrit.
Describe the phenomena of cerebral steal and inverse steal.
The regional distribution of cerebral blood flow can be altered,
sometimes unfavourably, by changes in the arterial carbon dioxide,
through the phenomena of steal and inverse steal,
which are instructive consequences of the carbon-dioxide reactivity and relevant to
managing the injured brain.
The basis is that the carbon-dioxide reactivity — the dilatation of cerebral
vessels by carbon dioxide — requires the vessels to be reactive,
but in an area of injury or ischaemia,
the vessels may already be maximally dilated by the local accumulation of
metabolites, and so unable to respond further.
Steal occurs with hypercapnia: raising the carbon dioxide dilates the normal,
reactive vessels, increasing flow to the normal brain;
but the vessels in the ischaemic area, already maximally dilated,
cannot dilate further, so blood is diverted away from the ischaemic area towards
the normal brain — the ischaemic area is robbed, or has blood stolen from it,
worsening its ischaemia.
Inverse steal, or the Robin Hood effect, occurs with hypocapnia:
lowering the carbon dioxide constricts the normal, reactive vessels,
reducing their flow, which may divert blood towards the ischaemic area whose
vessels cannot constrict — potentially benefiting the ischaemic area.
So because injured vessels may be maximally dilated and unreactive,
hypercapnia dilates the normal vessels and steals blood from the ischaemic area,
worsening it, while hypocapnia constricts the normal vessels and may divert blood
towards the ischaemic area — inverse steal;
phenomena of the carbon-dioxide reactivity relevant to managing carbon dioxide in
the injured brain.
Describe the neurovascular unit and the mechanisms of autoregulation.
The regulation of the cerebral blood flow — its autoregulation and its coupling to
metabolism — is increasingly understood in terms of the neurovascular unit,
and the mechanisms underlying autoregulation are worth setting out in a little more
detail.
The neurovascular unit is the functional ensemble of the neurons,
the glia — particularly the astrocytes — and the blood vessels,
which work together to match the local blood flow to the local needs;
the astrocytes, with their foot processes on both the neurons and the vessels,
are well placed to couple neuronal activity to vascular responses,
and to mediate the flow-metabolism coupling.
Autoregulation — the maintenance of constant flow despite changing pressure — is
achieved chiefly by the myogenic mechanism:
the vascular smooth muscle of the arterioles constricts in response to a rise in
transmural pressure and relaxes when it falls,
adjusting the resistance to keep the flow constant.
Metabolic factors contribute: if flow transiently falls,
the accumulation of metabolites — carbon dioxide, hydrogen ions,
adenosine — dilates the vessels, restoring flow.
Neurogenic influences also play a part. These mechanisms together produce the
autoregulatory plateau.
So the neurovascular unit — neurons, astrocytes and vessels acting together,
the astrocytes coupling activity to flow — mediates the matching of flow to need;
and autoregulation is achieved chiefly by the myogenic response of the arterioles
to transmural pressure, with metabolic and neurogenic contributions;
mechanisms producing the constancy of cerebral blood flow,
increasingly understood at the level of the neurovascular unit.
Describe the effects of vasoactive and vasopressor drugs on the cerebral
circulation.
The cerebral circulation responds to vasoactive and vasopressor drugs in ways that
differ from other vascular beds, owing to the blood-brain barrier and to
autoregulation, an understanding of which is important when using these drugs in
the patient with brain injury.
A key point is that the blood-brain barrier excludes many circulating vasoactive
substances and drugs from reaching the cerebral vascular smooth muscle directly,
so that drugs which act powerfully on other vessels may have little direct effect
on the cerebral vessels.
The commonly-used vasopressors — such as noradrenaline,
phenylephrine and metaraminol — therefore have little direct cerebral
vasoconstrictor effect; they raise the cerebral blood flow indirectly,
by raising the systemic arterial pressure and so the cerebral perfusion pressure,
provided autoregulation is intact, in which case the flow is held constant and only
the perfusion pressure rises, or provided autoregulation is impaired,
in which case the flow rises with the pressure.
So they are used to support the cerebral perfusion pressure.
The direct cerebral vasodilators — such as the volatile anaesthetics,
and drugs like the nitrates and some calcium antagonists — can dilate the cerebral
vessels, increasing the cerebral blood volume and intracranial pressure,
which may be undesirable in the injured brain.
So because the blood-brain barrier excludes many circulating vasoactive drugs,
the common vasopressors have little direct cerebral effect,
acting indirectly by raising the perfusion pressure to support flow;
while direct vasodilators such as the volatile agents and nitrates increase the
cerebral blood volume and intracranial pressure — effects important when using
these drugs in brain injury, where supporting perfusion pressure while avoiding
raised intracranial pressure is the aim.
Describe the principles of cerebral protection.
Cerebral protection — the attempt to reduce or prevent brain injury from ischaemia
or other insults — is an important goal in anaesthesia and critical care,
and its principles follow from the physiology of cerebral blood flow and metabolism
we have discussed.
The strategies are of two kinds: maintaining the supply of oxygen and substrate to
the brain, and reducing the brain's demand.
Maintaining supply means ensuring an adequate cerebral perfusion pressure — by
supporting the arterial pressure and controlling the intracranial pressure — and an
adequate oxygenation and oxygen-carrying capacity,
and avoiding the factors that reduce flow.
Reducing demand means lowering the cerebral metabolic rate:
hypothermia is the most effective, reducing both the functional and the basal
metabolism and so increasing the tolerance of ischaemia;
and the anaesthetic agents that reduce the cerebral metabolic rate,
such as the barbiturates and propofol, have been used,
though their benefit is limited largely to incomplete,
focal ischaemia where some flow remains,
and they cannot protect against complete global ischaemia for long.
Avoiding secondary insults — hypoxia, hypotension, hypercapnia, hyperthermia,
hypoglycaemia and hyperglycaemia, and seizures — which worsen injury,
is a crucial and effective part of protection.
So cerebral protection rests on maintaining the supply — adequate perfusion
pressure, oxygenation and oxygen-carrying capacity — and reducing the demand —
chiefly by hypothermia, and to a limited extent by metabolic-suppressant
anaesthetics in focal ischaemia — together with the avoidance of the secondary
insults of hypoxia, hypotension, hypercapnia,
hyperthermia and glycaemic disturbance;
principles following from the physiology of cerebral flow and metabolism.
Describe the Cushing reflex.
The Cushing reflex is a physiological response to a critically raised intracranial
pressure, and its recognition is clinically important as a sign of impending
catastrophe, while its mechanism illustrates the defence of the cerebral perfusion.
The reflex is a response to a severely raised intracranial pressure that threatens
the cerebral blood flow. As the intracranial pressure rises towards the arterial
pressure, the cerebral perfusion pressure falls and the brain,
particularly the brainstem, becomes ischaemic.
This ischaemia of the brainstem triggers a powerful sympathetic response that
raises the systemic arterial pressure markedly — an attempt to restore the cerebral
perfusion pressure by raising the arterial pressure above the intracranial pressure.
The resulting hypertension is then sensed by the arterial baroreceptors,
which trigger a reflex bradycardia.
The classical Cushing response is therefore the triad of hypertension, bradycardia,
and an abnormal, often irregular, respiratory pattern,
reflecting the brainstem compromise.
It is a late and ominous sign, indicating a critically raised intracranial pressure
and impending brainstem herniation, demanding immediate action.
So the Cushing reflex is the response to a critically raised intracranial pressure:
the brainstem ischaemia from the falling perfusion pressure triggers a sympathetic
surge raising the arterial pressure to restore perfusion,
with a reflex baroreceptor bradycardia and abnormal respiration — the triad of
hypertension, bradycardia and respiratory irregularity; a late,
ominous sign of critically raised intracranial pressure and impending herniation,
demanding immediate action.
Describe the changes in cerebral blood flow during seizures and the concept of
luxury perfusion.
Certain pathological states alter the relationship between cerebral blood flow and
metabolism, and the changes during seizures, and the concept of luxury perfusion,
are worth describing as instructive examples of the coupling and its disturbance.
During a seizure, the intense, abnormal neuronal activity greatly increases the
cerebral metabolic rate, and, through flow-metabolism coupling,
the cerebral blood flow rises markedly to match the increased demand.
However, if the seizure is prolonged,
the increased flow may become inadequate to meet the greatly increased metabolic
demand, and the neurons may suffer metabolic stress and injury — part of the reason
that prolonged seizures cause neuronal damage and must be terminated.
Luxury perfusion is the opposite mismatch:
a blood flow in excess of the metabolic demand.
It occurs in some pathological states,
classically in the area around an infarct or injury,
where the tissue is damaged and its metabolism reduced,
but the flow is relatively high — perhaps from the vasodilatation caused by the
accumulated acidic metabolites — so that the flow exceeds the now-reduced demand;
the venous blood draining such an area is well-oxygenated.
So during seizures the cerebral metabolic rate and blood flow both rise greatly,
but a prolonged seizure may outstrip the flow and injure the neurons;
while luxury perfusion is a flow in excess of demand,
seen around infarcts where the metabolism is reduced but the flow relatively
maintained — instructive examples of the coupling of flow and metabolism and its
disturbance in disease.
Describe the changes in cerebral blood flow and metabolism with age and development.
The cerebral blood flow and metabolism are not constant through life but change
with development and ageing, and an awareness of this is useful,
since it affects the management of the very young and the elderly.
In the neonate and infant, the brain is developing rapidly,
and the cerebral blood flow and metabolic rate, relative to brain mass, are high;
the autoregulatory range is present but narrower and more easily disturbed,
and the immature cerebral vessels are vulnerable,
contributing to the risk of haemorrhage in the preterm infant.
Through childhood, the cerebral blood flow and metabolic rate,
expressed per unit brain mass, are actually higher than in the adult,
reflecting the high activity of the developing brain,
before declining towards adult values.
In the adult, the flow is around fifty millilitres per hundred grams per minute as
described.
With ageing, the cerebral blood flow and metabolic rate decline gradually,
in parallel, reflecting the loss of neurons and reduced activity;
the cerebral vessels become less compliant,
and cerebrovascular disease becomes common,
so autoregulation may be impaired and the curve shifted by chronic hypertension.
So the cerebral blood flow and metabolic rate are high relative to brain mass in
infancy and childhood, with a narrower,
more vulnerable autoregulatory range in the neonate;
and decline gradually with ageing, with impaired autoregulation and common
cerebrovascular disease — developmental and age-related changes affecting the
management of the cerebral circulation at the extremes of age.
Thank you. An excellent account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The brain receives ~50 mL/100 g/min (~15% of cardiac output),
more to active grey matter; high oxygen consumption (~20% of body total),
almost total dependence on aerobic glucose metabolism,
and negligible reserve — so interrupted flow causes unconsciousness in seconds and
injury in minutes.
Second, Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) = mean arterial pressure − intracranial
pressure (the enclosed brain). Cerebral blood flow (CBF) = CPP ÷ cerebrovascular
resistance; normal CPP ~70-80 mmHg.
Flow depends on arterial pressure, intracranial pressure and the actively-varied
vascular resistance. Third, CBF is autoregulated (plateau) over a mean arterial
pressure of ~60-160 mmHg by myogenic adjustment of arteriolar tone — below:
ischaemia; above: oedema/haemorrhage.
The curve shifts right in chronic hypertension and is impaired by injury and
anaesthetic agents (leaving flow pressure-dependent).
Fourth, CBF varies almost linearly with arterial CO2 (rises with hypercapnia,
falls with hypocapnia, via perivascular pH) — so hyperventilation reduces CBF and
cerebral blood volume (used to lower raised ICP acutely);
it is little affected by O2 until arterial PaO2 falls below ~50 mmHg,
when flow rises steeply.
CBF is coupled to cerebral metabolic rate (flow-metabolism coupling),
regionally and globally.
Fifth, Anaesthetic agents: IV agents except ketamine reduce CMRO2 and (by coupling)
CBF and blood volume — favourable in raised ICP; ketamine increases them;
volatile agents reduce CMRO2 but directly vasodilate cerebral vessels,
tending at higher doses to raise cerebral blood volume and ICP and impair
autoregulation.
Measured by Kety-Schmidt/inert tracers, imaging,
and bedside transcranial Doppler (velocity); oxygenation surrogates:
jugular venous saturation, cerebral oximetry.
Thank you. That concludes the station.